
Find the largest subarray with 0 sum
3.3

Given an array of integers, find length of the largest subarray with sum equals to 0.

Examples:

Input: arr[] = {15, -2, 2, -8, 1, 7, 10, 23};
Output: 5
The largest subarray with 0 sum is -2, 2, -8, 1, 7

Input: arr[] = {1, 2, 3}
Output: 0
There is no subarray with 0 sum

Input: arr[] = {1, 0, 3}
Output: 1


A simple solution is to consider all subarrays one by one and check the sum of every subarray. We can run two loops: the outer loop picks a starting point i and the inner loop tries all subarrays starting from i. Time complexity of this method is O(n2).

Below are implementations of this solution.

# Python program to find the length of largest subarray with 0 sum
 
# returns the length
def maxLen(arr):
     
    # initialize result
    max_len = 0
 
    # pick a starting point
    for i in range(len(arr)):
         
        # initialize sum for every starting point
        curr_sum = 0
         
        # try all subarrays starting with 'i'
        for j in range(i, len(arr)):
         
            curr_sum += arr[j]
 
            # if curr_sum becomes 0, then update max_len
            if curr_sum == 0:
                max_len = max(max_len, j-i+1)
 
    return max_len
 
 
# test array
arr = [15, -2, 2, -8, 1, 7, 10, 13]
 
print "Length of the longest 0 sum subarray is %d" %  maxLen(arr) 

Output:

Length of the longest 0 sum subarray is 5

We can Use Hashing to solve this problem in O(n) time. The idea is to iterate through the array and for every element arr[i], calculate sum of elements form 0 to i (this can simply be done as sum += arr[i]). If the current sum has been seen before, then there is a zero sum array. Hashing is used to store the sum values, so that we can quickly store sum and find out whether the current sum is seen before or not.

Following are implementations of the above approach.

# A python program to find maximum length subarray 
# with 0 sum in o(n) time
 
# Returns the maximum length
def maxLen(arr):
     
    # NOTE: Dictonary in python in implemented as Hash Maps
    # Create an empty hash map (dictionary)
    hash_map = {}
 
    # Initialize result
    max_len = 0
 
    # Initialize sum of elements
    curr_sum = 0
 
    # Traverse through the given array
    for i in range(len(arr)):
         
        # Add the current element to the sum
        curr_sum += arr[i]
 
        if arr[i] is 0 and max_len is 0:
            max_len = 1
 
        if curr_sum is 0:
            max_len = i+1
 
        # NOTE: 'in' operation in dictionary to search 
        # key takes O(1). Look if current sum is seen 
        # before
        if curr_sum in hash_map:
            max_len = max(max_len, i - hash_map[curr_sum] )
        else:
 
            # else put this sum in dictionary
            hash_map[curr_sum] = i
 
    return max_len
 
 
# test array
arr = [15, -2, 2, -8, 1, 7, 10, 13]
  
print "Length of the longest 0 sum subarray is %d" %  maxLen(arr)

Output:

Length of the longest 0 sum subarray is 5

Time Complexity of this solution can be considered as O(n) under the assumption that we have good hashing function that allows insertion and retrieval operations in O(1) time.
