
Largest subarray with equal number of 0s and 1s
4.1

Given an array containing only 0s and 1s, find the largest subarray which contain equal no of 0s and 1s. Expected time complexity is O(n).

Examples:

Input: arr[] = {1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0}
Output: 1 to 6 (Starting and Ending indexes of output subarray)

Input: arr[] = {1, 1, 1, 1}
Output: No such subarray

Input: arr[] = {0, 0, 1, 1, 0}
Output: 0 to 3 Or 1 to 4


Method 1 (Simple)
A simple method is to use two nested loops. The outer loop picks a starting point i. The inner loop considers all subarrays starting from i. If size of a subarray is greater than maximum size so far, then update the maximum size.
In the below code, 0s are considered as -1 and sum of all values from i to j is calculated. If sum becomes 0, then size of this subarray is compared with largest size so far.

# A simple program to find the largest subarray
# with equal number of 0s and 1s
 
# This function Prints the starting and ending
# indexes of the largest subarray with equal 
# number of 0s and 1s. Also returns the size 
# of such subarray.
def findSubArray(arr, n):
 
    sum = 0
    maxsize = -1
 
    # Pick a starting point as i
 
    for i in range(0, n-1):
     
        sum = -1 if(arr[i] == 0) else 1
 
        # Consider all subarrays starting from i
 
        for j in range(i + 1, n):
         
            sum = sum + (-1) if (arr[j] == 0) else sum + 1
 
            # If this is a 0 sum subarray, then 
            # compare it with maximum size subarray
            # calculated so far
 
            if (sum == 0 and maxsize < j-i + 1):
                 
                maxsize = j - i + 1
                startindex = i
             
         
     
    if (maxsize == -1):
        print("No such subarray");
    else:
        print(startindex, "to", startindex + maxsize-1);
 
    return maxsize
 
# Driver program to test above functions
arr = [1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1]
size = len(arr)
findSubArray(arr, size)
 
# This code is contributed by Smitha Dinesh Semwal


Output:

 0 to 5

Time Complexity: O(n^2)
Auxiliary Space: O(1)


